---
title: 'Barbie: Breaking Free from the Plastic Mold'
date: '2023-11-23'
description: 'Barbie'
---

## Summary

We first get a glimpse into the life at Barbieland. Women run and pioneer
everything 100%—the president is a woman, the Supreme Court is 100% women, women
are winning Nobel prizes for physics and literature, and all doctors are women.
It’s the perfect place for Barbie.

Things begin to take a turn when Barbie has a random thought about death. When
her feet turn from permanent high-heel position to flat, she is distraught that
she isn’t the typical pretty anymore. She learns that the Real World human
playing with her must be sad and that she must go to the human world to make her
owner happy again.

Barbie travels to the human world and is instantly sexually harassed by men—male
civilians and even the police catcall, ogle, and make sexually expletive remarks
about her. Barbie has a vision of the girl presumably linked with her; Barbie
finds her but is ridiculed (rightfully so) for perpetuating stereotypes about
women, capitalism, and the patriarchy.

Meanwhile, Ken is amazed at how the world is made for men. Ken is enamored with
horses, big cars, working out, big corporate, shitting on women, the whole
shebang on toxic masculinity. Ken is so amazed that a woman asked him for the
time. Ken feels like he has to share the patriarchy with Barbieland and seeks to
indoctrinate it into patriarchy.

Mattel takes Barbie to the headquarters, which is hilariously (but also
soberingly) run by an all-male committee. They are all bumbling fools who love
to mansplain and jump into stupid “out of the box” solutions like hopping fences
instead of going around or getting the keycard for an electronic gate until they
realize they don’t need it. They love fancy buzzword acronyms–like end-of-day
(EOD)—and they all repeat after the CEO like they just all ~beach off~ each
other all day.

Barbie goes back to Barbieland but is shocked to see everything
patriarchy-ified. Women serve men by giving them beers and foot massages. There
are massive cars and TVs everywhere. And mini fridges for beer. Men mansplaining
finances and The Godfather.

With Weird Barbie, the anti-patriarchy Barbies come up with their plan to retake
Barbieland. They first convert Barbies by having the Mom (Gloria) talk about the
struggles of being a woman—things like being expected to be perfect.

- You have to be thin but not too thin. And you can’t say you want to be thin;
  you say you want to be healthy.
- You have to be a boss, but you can’t be mean. You have to lead but can’t
  squash other people’s ideas.
  - This reminded me of the professor bit in Criado-Perez (2019, p.99):
    > Female professors are penalized if they aren’t deemed sufficiently warm
    > and accessible. But if they are warm and accessible, they can be penalized
    > for not appearing authoritative or professional. On the other hand,
    > appearing authoritative and knowledgeable as a woman can result in student
    > disapproval because this violates gendered expectations. (Criado-Perez,
    > 2019, p.99)
- Assertive and aggressiveness is viewed negatively in women, while this is
  viewed positively in men.
- Answer for men’s bad behavior, which is insane

Then, the Barbies make the men fight each other by targeting their egos: They
pull out a phone when Ken serenades Barbie, making them feel like they aren’t
enough (rather, Kenough). They go for their insecurities.

While the Kens are fighting amongst themselves, Barbies retake Barbieland for
themselves.

At the end of the movie, Ken even admits that he lost interest in the patriarchy
when he found out it wasn’t about horses. What Ken needs to do is figure out who
he is.

## Analysis

First and foremost, Barbie highlights the struggles of being a woman in a world
built for men. However, it also highlights the growing pains of personhood and
adulthood. Regarding the difficulties with coming of age, Barbie has to deal
with the unfair expectations placed on women, while Ken has to find his
identity.

Ken used patriarchy as a purpose for life. By becoming enveloped in toxic
masculinity. By taking other people’s meaning. Women serve him by being maids,
serving beers, giving foot massages, and giving validation when mansplaining.

But none of this helps with Ken’s issues, like codependency, obsession, low
self-esteem, and a complete lack of identity. Ken has no dreams or passions and
serves no purpose besides relying on Barbie.

As succinctly put by Lee (2023),

> Gosling’s Ken later denounces the patriarchy and learns from Barbie not to
> define himself by his possessions, his relationship, or his job of just
> ‘beach’. He’s just Ken, and he’s Kenough.

Another problem with the patriarchy is the exclusion aspect of it based on how
closely you adhere to toxic masculinity–and stereotypical gender roles as a
whole. The patriarchy is a set of forced ideals that you have to stick to to be
accepted. If you don’t like men riding horses, beer, big cars, bold fashion, and
misogyny, society shuns you. The Barbie movie does not focus too much on this
side of things, understandably so because this is a film more about the female
experience; plus, we already know how detrimental patriarchy is. Gerwig just
takes us a step further in awareness that things like patriarchy exist for some
sort of (deranged) purpose that guides some throughout the confusing and
haphazard thing that is life on planet Earth.

Overall, Barbie is an excellent movie that is playful and entertaining but also
makes you think. It is timely as society becomes more aware of the unfair
expectations placed on women: beauty standards, emotional availability, and
capacity for unpaid work (things like chores or tending to the young and
elderly). But we are still figuring out how to offshore duties to men to balance
things out. The new generation is also re-imagining the work-life balance,
having kids or not, and the purpose of your career. Even though women have more
autonomy over their lives in some societies today, this is not often the case.
In Japan, partly due to the extreme work culture, women often end up on dead-end
career paths:

> The non-career-track option is mainly administrative, offers few opportunities
> for advancement, and is known informally as the ‘mommy’ track – because
> ‘mommies’ don’t fit into the kind of work-culture required for someone on the
> career track. (Criado-Perez, 2019, pp. 87-88)

While many reject corporate life, these non-career-track jobs are unfulfilling
and likely to hurt life happiness. It’s time we put more awareness and effort
into enabling women to choose what they want to do in their lives—and not just
for careers. We need to stop treating women as the afterthought of a man. We
need to start consulting women before designing things. And we need to close the
gender data gap. ...As a guy, I want to acknowledge that this seems a bit like
virtue signaling, so…I’m 6’1. And I have a skincare routine.

## References

Gerwig, G. (Director). (2023). _Barbie_ \[Film\]. Heyday Films; LuckyChap
Entertainment; NB/GG Pictures; Mattel Films.

Criado-Perez, C. (2019). _Invisible Women: Exposing Data Bias in a World
Designed for Men._ https://a.co/d/c8MjuXk

Lee, A. (2023, July 28). _How hilarious ‘Barbie’ earworm ‘I’m Just Ken’ brings
toxic masculinity to its knees. Los Angeles Times_.
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/movies/story/2023-07-28/barbie-movie-ryan-gosling-im-just-ken-lyrics-dance-moves-explained
