---
title: 'The Landscape of the Human Mind'
date: '2022-10-30'
description: "You've probably heard about the subconscious and the conscious, but do you understand how they interact? And what about the voluble inner voice, as dubbed by Kate Murphy?"
---

The toughest semester of my life was fall/winter 2020. I was entirely consumed by what was regarded as the toughest class in my major. In my free time, I loved watching cooking videos, so I really had nothing going on besides school and food. When reflecting on how that semester felt, the best way to describe it was that it was one long marathon—the days all merged into one.

I felt reborn going into winter break. Overwhelming clarity and feelings of being refreshed hit like waves as I left campus and got on the airplane for home. But what was I to do without needing to worry about school or cooking? Lucky for me, my subconscious made plans. Having spent a whole semester practically giving no time to simply sit down and be with my thoughts, my subconscious was neglected and gasping for air. In particular, it was dying to tell me that I was not fulfilled and was losing touch with former hobbies.

While my subconscious thoughts briefly surfaced in the form of the occasional shower thought, I still had given no time to the inner voice. Why was this important? For one, the inner voice impacts how you view yourself and hear others. In _You're Not Listening_ by Kate Murphy, Murphy illustrates this by contrasting two voices:

> An inner voice that says, Are you sure you want to do that? Why don’t you put yourself in their shoes? And Yeah, that was hurtful, but maybe they didn’t intend to hurt you, is a very different voice from the one that says, They are all out to get me and I’m no good. The latter voice is the one that makes you react in ways that are not to your benefit (Murphy 2020, 131)

By internalizing the qualities of the second voice, one is more likely to become more bitter and self-loathing, which is only reinforced when social interactions are perceived as worse than they actually were. The subconscious becomes intrusive and erratic, and the inner voice becomes irrational: resulting in a cloudy and unhappy mind. On the other hand, internalizing the qualities of the first voice makes you more understanding and empathetic. Most importantly, you will feel at peace.

When the inner dialogue is able to take multiple sides to a conversation, and is collaborative while doing so, it makes problem solving easy—which is what I use the inner voice the most for. The solution usually already resides in you, you just have to develop it. Or maybe it's just an irrational thought or you're overthinking. I, myself, am a frequent and organized journaler—just a glance at my Notes app will tell you how big of a role my inner voice plays in my decision making and problem solving. My journal categories are as follows: ‘Career’, ‘Planning’, ‘Processing’, ‘Questions’, ‘Self Help’, ‘Struggles’, ‘Workout’, ‘Awakenings’, ‘Decision Making’, and ‘Brain Dump’. Whenever I get a bothersome feeling from the subconscious, I try to develop it out with the inner voice, resolve any problems, then categorize it. This has led to a kinder and more collaborative inner voice as well as a freedom from mind, which I believe is the key for happiness.

But how is the inner voice shaped? And how can we improve it? First, let's try to better define the inner voice. We know the inner voice has a main dialogue, but it also has the ability to talk to itself from other perspectives:

> In his book _The Voices Within_, Fernyhough writes that many great philosophers and social theorists, including William James, Charles Sanders Peirce, and George Herbert Mead, believed the self generates conversations with itself by taking the perspective of another. An example is an athlete who might internalize the voice of a coach. Or you might have a back-and-forth with yourself that resembles exchanges you've had with your mother, boss, spouse, sibling, friend, or maybe a therapist (Murphy 2020, 129)

Therefore, the inner voice's tone and viewpoints are shaped by experiences with other people—including indirect interactions like watching TV personalities or reading a book. While your inner voice is not exactly your personality, the two are closely related and share similar qualities. Your inner voice has a personality, and it can generate conversations with itself, where those differing viewpoints each can have a personality. Additionally, Murphy argues that the inner voice is perceived as louder, as proven by researchers from China and the United States, so it has a large impact on your reactions to various scenarios—your personality. The degree of impact depends per person since some rarely tap into their inner dialogue.

The key difference between your personality and inner voice is the layer of translation that occurs between them, as well as the noise that affects each of them. Now, here's the landscape of the human mind: the subconscious is the source of emotions and thoughts—these can be constructive or irrational, uplifting or defeating, enlightening or mundane, happy or depressing. The inner voice then collects and filters some of these subconscious entities, generating coherent ideas, beliefs, and a sense of self. Finally, everything pools into what is your personality, containing old and new experiences. There is a loss of translation at each layer, and the inner voice is not the sole contributor to personality. As argued by Dr. Kanojia, psychiatrist and co-founder of mental health coaching company Healthy Gamer, personality is best described by the eastern perspective. For the purpose of understanding the inner voice, let's briefly cover personality:

1. Manas - Emotional / Judgmental / Reactive - e.g. you get asked, "how did you sleep last night?" You notice everyone in the group staring at you, grinning. So you react by being careful in your response.
2. Ahamkara - Ego / Sense of Self - How you perceive yourself: I believe I am this. Can act to protect you from the Manas, similar to how inner dialogue can protect weed out ideas from the subconscious. However, it is paradoxical at times as you can adopt numbing strategies: I got rejected. An easy way to deal with this is by believing that I do not deserve love/ am not ready.
3. Samskara - Impression in the mind that is recalled in a particular scenario / programming -
   e.g. my last partner cheated, so now I’m afraid of betrayal. Worry if new partner is only late. The bad mind impressions are formed by improper digestion, or processing.

While you can't exactly seek positive experiences in the future nor remove past experiences (Samskara), you can [change how you react](https://youtu.be/t_NRIVq2vzM). By focusing on your default response, problems become apparent and you become self-aware. Remember the unhelpful voice from the first quote, They are all out to get me and I’m no good? On paper, it is easy to evaluate this reaction and recognize that it is irrational and defeating: people rarely have harmful intentions. However, focusing on fixing the negatives is just one part of the puzzle; we still need to be able to develop good responses. Again, these are best formed by focusing on the default response. By applying this technique, both the personality and inner voice can be improved.

Another way to shape the inner voice is by being an open and honest listener. The more people you listen to, "the more sides of the conversation the inner voice can take and the more solutions you can imagine" (Murphy 2020, 130). This isn't to say to listen to everyone; some people are not worth listening to. Rather, apply what Murphy coins as the support response, where you provide evaluative and descriptive feedback while avoiding misunderstandings and your own prejudice. If you are interested in the art of listening, I highly recommend Murphy's book.

Unfortunately for some, their inner voice is overly critical. People take great lengths to shut out their inner voice, probably because it nags them or brings up trauma. But the longer the subconscious and inner voice are neglected, the louder they become. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy is a great solution for this.

I would like to close with a final quote from Murphy, inviting the reader to consider their inner voice:

> Who does your inner voice remind you of? What does it tell you? Does your inner voice sound different in different situations? Is it friendly? Is it critical? These are all important things to ask yourself because your inner voice influences how you ponder things, interpret situations, make moral judgments, and solve problems. This, in turn, influences how you are in the world; whether you see the best or worst in people and whether you see the best or worst in yourself (Murphy 2020, 133)
