---
title: 'Beyond the Independent Self: The Power of Interdependence'
date: '2023-1-22'
description: 'Explore the negative consequences of an independent view of the self, including the prevalence of ego-centric emotions, the self-serving bias, and the tendency to compare oneself to others. Learn how an interdependent view of the self can lead to greater empathy, connection, and well-being.'
---

I was taken aback when I learned that collectivism might protect against the development of depression. However, as discussed in the last post, this is only the case for some. Nevertheless, individualism and collectivism have tradeoffs, and we should view them as so.

To get more background on the impacts of collectivism vs. individualism and how it changes the self, I read Professors Hazel Markus and Shinobu Kitayama’s paper, “Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation.” First, the professors define a problem in psychology in that most of what psychologists know about human nature is based on one particular view–the so-called Western view of the individual as an independent, self-contained, autonomous entity who:

Comprises a unique configuration of internal attributes (e.g., traits, abilities, motives, and values)
Behaves primarily as a consequence of these internal attributes (Geertz, 1975; Sampson, 1988,1989; Shweder & LeVine, 1984; as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991, p.224).

## Two Construals of the Self: Independent and Interdependent

Markus and Kitayama compare the western, _independent_ view of the self with a newly defined one, the _interdependent_ view. The _interdependent_ view of the self is exemplified in Japanese, Asian, African, Latin-American, and many southern European cultures.

The universal aspect of the self is that humans can recognize that they are distinct from others. Markus & Kitayama (1991) also state that each person probably has some awareness of internal activity, e.g., dreams, the continuous flow of thoughts and feelings, which are private to the extent that others cannot directly know them. Essentially, fundamental self-awareness is the undisputed sense of self everyone attains.

Where the notion of the self diverges, however, is the extent that the individual is the primary unit of consciousness: “Instead, the sense of belongingness to a social relation may become so strong that it makes better sense to think of the relationship as the functional unit of conscious reflection” (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.226).

In Western culture, it is the dream to become self-sustaining, to discover and express unique talents, and to chase dreams and inner voice (Johnson, 1985; Marsella et al., 1985; J. G. Miller, 1988; Shweder & Bourne, 1984; as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991, p.226). Achieving this goal requires constructing oneself as an individual whose behavior is organized and made meaningful primarily by reference to one’s internal repertoire of thoughts, feelings, and actions rather than by reference to the thoughts, feelings, and actions of others (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.226). This view of the self derives from a belief in the wholeness and uniqueness of each person’s configuration of internal attributes (Johnson, 1985; Sampson, 1985, 1988, 1989; Waterman, 1981; as cited in Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.226). It gives rise to processes like "self-actualization," "realizing oneself," "expressing one's unique configuration of needs, rights, and capacities," or "developing one's distinct potential." Some synonyms for this independent view of the self include _individualist_, _egocentric_, _separate_, _autonomous_, _idiocentric_, and _self-contained_ (Markus & Kitayama 1991, p.226).

In contrast, many non-Western cultures insist, in Kondo's (1982) terms, on the fundamental connectedness of human beings to each other (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.227). Experiencing interdependence entails seeing oneself as part of an encompassing social relationship and recognizing that one's behavior is determined, contingent on, and, to a large extent, organized by what the actor perceives to be the thoughts, feelings, and actions of others in the relationship (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.227). This view of the self and the relationship between the self and others features the person not as separate from the social context but as more connected and less differentiated from others (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.227). People are motivated to find a way to fit in with relevant others, fulfill and create obligations, and become part of various interpersonal relationships (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.227). Some synonyms for this interdependent view of the self include _sociocentric_, _holistic_, _collective_, _allocentric_, _ensembled_, _constitutive_, _contextualist_, _connected_, and _relational_ (Markus & Kitayama 1991).

To help compare the two construals of the self, Markus & Kitayama provide figures to illustrate the similarities and differences. The independent self entails viewing your thoughts, emotions, and other internals entirely belonging to yourself, whereas the same applies to others. The internals is represented by X’s, and the selves are circles containing many X’s. In the independent view of the self, yourself, your mother, father, and friend all have selves separated from each other. In contrast, in the interdependent view of the self, our relationships are part of ourselves. Here are some cultural examples to aid in comparing the two views of the self.

> The traditional Japanese mother carries the child on her back for most of the first two years. Lebra (1976) claimed that Japanese mothers teach their children to fear the pain of loneliness, whereas Westerners teach children how to be alone (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.237)

> American parents trying to induce their children to eat their suppers are fond of saying, ‘think of the starving kids in Ethiopia, and appreciate how lucky you are to be different from them.’ Japanese parents are likely to say, ‘Think about the farmer who worked so hard to produce this rice for you; if you do not eat it, he will feel bad, for his efforts will have been in vain’(Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.224)

There are various consequences for these two views of the self (Markus & Kitayama also cover the difference in cognition, but it is not the most pertinent to the topic at hand).

## Consequences for Emotion

In previous psychological works, it was argued that while most emotions are viewed as universally experienced “natural” human phenomena, emotions are anything but natural (Lutz 1988 as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991, p.235). Rosaldo (1984) contended that "feelings are not substances to be discovered in our blood but social practices organized by stories that we both enact and tell. Our forms of understanding structure them" (p. 143), and we would add, expressly, by one's construal of the self (Markus & Kitayama 1991, p.235). Beyond the basic emotions as the fear invoked by a bright light or the pleasure from something sweet, emotions are a product of social life.

In the same way Markus & Kitayama (1991) defined the two selves, we can place emotions into two categories: _ego-focused_ and _other-focused_. Some examples of _ego-focused_ emotions include anger, frustration, and pride–the critical distinction is that these have the individual internal attributes (needs, goals, desires, abilities) as the primary referent. On the other hand, _other-focused_ emotions like sympathy, feelings of interpersonal communion, and shame have _another_ person as the primary referent.

To illustrate how emotions are not universal, Markus & Kitayama (1991) cite an example of how the _ego-focused_ feeling of anger is practically nonexistent in some cultures. This is the case in Tahiti, where anger is highly feared. It is not that people have learned to suppress their “real” anger, but rather that “they have learned the importance of attending to others, considering others, and being gentle in all situations, and as a consequence, very little anger is elicited” (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.236). Eskimo cultures exhibit the same behavior: they do not feel, express, or talk about anger. Eskimos label angry behavior as “childish” when they observe it in foreigners (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.236).

Meanwhile, in America, some argue that expressing anger is necessary to blow off steam; others argue for the importance of controlling one’s anger. However, these are under the assumption that anger is a typically experienced emotion. The same differences can be held for the emotions of pride and guilt. Stipek et al. (1989) found that the Chinese were less likely to claim their successful efforts as a source of pride than Americans (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). Furthermore, those with independent selves felt guilt when violating “a law or a moral principle,” while among Chinese, “the most commonly reported source of guilt was ‘hurting others psychologically’”(Markus & Kitayama, 1991).

As anger is practically nonexistent in some cultures, the same notion of culture-specific emotions applies to the West. To illustrate this, Markus & Kitayama (1991) document many _other-focused_ emotions, namely emotions indigenous to the Japanese. One such example is the feeling of _Amae_: “defined as the sense of, or the accompanying hope for, being lovingly cared for and involves depending on and presuming another’s indulgence…When a person experiences _amae_, she or he "feels the freedom to do whatever he or she wills" while being accepted and cared for by others with few strings attached. Some say _amae_ is a type of complete acceptance, a phenomenal replication of the ideal mother-infant bond (L. T. Doi, 1973)”(Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.237). Moreover, Markus & Kitayama (1991) classify _amae_ as an ambivalent, other-focused emotion.

Another indigenous and other-focused emotion is _Fureai_, a feeling of connection with someone. There are also Japanese ego-focused emotions, like _Yuetukan_, or the feeling of superiority. Markus & Kitayama (1991) detail several other-focused Japanese indigenous emotions, demonstrating the variety of emotions that can arise when another person is the primary referent. Typically, and in the past, emotions can be categorized under a two-dimensional system: activation and pleasantness. However, Markus & Kitayama discover that this system is insufficient when considering different cultures, so a third dimension of “the extent to which the person is engaged in or disengaged from an interpersonal relationship” is added.

## Consequences for Motivation

Motivation in the West usually involves some type of internal, individually rooted need or motive–the motive to enhance one’s self-esteem, the motive to achieve, the motive to affiliate, the motive to avoid cognitive conflict, or the motive to self-actualize (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.239). Quite expectedly, terms related to motivation for those with interdependent selves stress the other.

Murray (1938) assembled what he believed to be a comprehensive list of human motivations (see also Hilgard, 1953, 1987, as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991, p.240). These human motivations apply to both construals of the self:

- _Deference_: the need to admire and willingly follow a superior, to serve gladly
- _Similance_: the need to imitate or emulate others, to agree and believe
- _Affiliation_: the need to form friendships and associations
- _Nurturance_: the need to nourish, aid, or protect another
- _Succorance_: the need to seek aid, projection, or sympathy and to be dependent -_Avoidance of blame_: the need to avoid blame, ostracism, or punishment by inhibiting unconventional impulses and to be well behaved and obey the law
- _Abasement_: the need to comply and accept punishment or self-deprecation

In an interdependent culture, most of these motives are experienced as positive and desirable. However, in an independent culture, the motivations of _similance_ and _succorance_ are viewed as unfavorable since they defy the cultural need for independence–thus giving rise to _abasement_.

This relates back to the typical American motive of breaking away, pushing ahead, and gaining control over surroundings. Feeling good about oneself typically requires fulfilling being unique, expressing one’s inner attributes, and asserting oneself. Although not uncontested, a reasonable empirical generalization from the research on self-related motives is that Westerners, particularly those with high self-esteem, try to enhance themselves whenever possible, and this tendency results in a pervasive self-serving bias (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.242). Most Americans develop this self-favorability bias, even just at four years old:

> 70% of Americans believe they are above average in leadership skills. Concerning the ‘ability to get along with others,’ 0% thought they were below average, 60% thought they were in the top 10%, and 25% thought they were in the top 1% (Myers, 1987, as cited in Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.242)

In contrast, self-enhancement and self-promotion are viewed quite negatively in Japanese culture. To test this, Yoshida et al. (1982) gathered ratings on a dimension of personality (is he a good person?) and a dimension of ability (is he good at \_\_?) on a peer who commented on their superb athletic performance in a modest or self-promoting way (Yoshida et al., 1982, Study 1, as cited by Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.242).

Expectedly, the personality of the modest person was perceived much more favorably than the self-promoting one. However, what was interesting was the rating of competency (ability). The self-enhancing one was viewed as more competent than the modest one by 2nd graders, but 5th graders viewed the modest one as more competent.

These findings indicate that as children are socialized in an interdependent cultural context, they begin to appreciate the cultural value of self-restraint and to believe in a positive association between self-restraint and other favorable attributes of the person not only in the social and emotional domains but also in the domains of ability and competence (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.242)

## Strengths of the Interdependent Construal

Being easily angered and exhibiting it is detrimental as it burdens others and decreases everyone's happiness, among other things. In an independent society, we may emphasize the importance of ego-centric emotions as a whole too heavily, thus inhibiting and diminishing our ability to understand and be receptive to other-focused emotions. As a result, we lose our ability to tend to others, be sympathetic, and figure out what others feel. In short, we have become more robotic. While other factors like the rise of internet usage and competition contribute to it, a very independent view of the self may contribute to a decline in _truly_ listening: a trend that Kate Murphy has noted in _You’re not Listening_. When others genuinely listen to us by providing descriptive and evaluative feedback while avoiding misunderstandings, we feel human; this type of feedback is what Murphy calls the support response. On the other hand, let us say you were ranting to a friend, but they ignore understanding your feelings by prescribing help or changing the topic (the shift response). You had likely experienced this before, where someone completely missed the point of what you were talking about—it was a complete clash of brain wavelengths, and you got left feeling unsatisfied and unheard.

Markus & Kitayama (1991) noted that the desire to set ourselves apart and promote or enhance ourselves whenever possible can result in a self-favorability bias. As shown above, we are most likely (hilariously) wrong about rating our skills to the average, despite our favorability for ourselves. Consequently, especially for those with high self-esteem, the incessant need to self-promote can result in a pervasive self-serving bias. Those with a self-serving bias are stuck in a cycle of self-enhancement, reject the validity of negative feedback, and take more credit than what is due when receiving positive feedback.

The self-serving bias hinders one in processing identity conflicts: one would likely never consider themselves the problem and will engage in unconstructive thought patterns to protect self-esteem. For example, when receiving a bad grade on a test, one might blame the teacher instead of studying methodology. Alternatively, if one gets rejected by a love interest, one might give up on love. The self-serving bias hinders one from improving themselves and their relationships by misconstruing valuable feedback as attacks on self-esteem.

Regarding self-esteem, throughout “Culture and the self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation,” Markus & Kitayama (1991) note that self-esteem may be unique to Western cultures and that a term like self-satisfaction should perhaps replace it. For the independent construal, self-esteem is defined as the “ability to express oneself and validate internal attributes,” while it is the “ability to adjust, restrain oneself, and maintain harmony with social context” in the interdependent construal (Markus & Kitayama, 1991, p.230).

The notion of self-esteem can result in greater despair: coupled with comparison, we can quickly lose self-esteem without constant validation. Furthermore, self-esteem can bring forth intense shame when not meeting societal expectations. Nonetheless, self-esteem is essential regardless of what culture one belongs to (it is part of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs); it can be a powerful defense mechanism that lets one know when to improve their relationships or skills.

Finally, there is the detrimental act of comparison. We must set ourselves apart in an individualistic society, chase the most prestigious achievements, and promote ourselves whenever possible. Instead of viewing others as equals and relationships as part of us, everyone is fighting to enhance the self, and the increase in competition that has been occurring over the past few decades only enhances this (Wilkinson et al., 2009; Wilkinson & Pickett, 2006; as cited in Hidaka 2012). Instead of looking outwards with compassion, we may fall into the trap of comparison. For the self, this can lead to feelings of inferiority, which spawn problems like narcissism and inferiority-superiority complexes. Others, particularly those with independent selves, will feel at risk and be manipulated into defending their self-esteem.

> Comparison is the thief of joy (Theodore Roosevelt)

We can adopt aspects of the interdependent view of the self to improve our lives and relationships. The first is simply to increase the value of our relationships in our lives. With the independent view of self-enhancement and not seeing others as part of our construal of ourselves, one may overlook the importance of relationships as they will not allow us to “break free” or “set ourselves apart.” We will then neglect relationships in favor of self-enhancement; however, this lonely path increases unhappiness and dissatisfaction. After all, there is a reason why there are many collective cultures. In addition, by adopting some of the interdependent views of the self, we may discover and be more attuned to other-focused emotions and motivations. This will lead us to become more considerate and sympathetic and widen our worldview on what we _really_ want in life. Finally, we learn how we may not consider the dimension of interdependence in emotions, motivations, psychology, and the world around us.

## References

- Hidaka B. H. (2012). Depression as a Disease of Modernity: Explanations for Increasing Prevalence. _Journal of Affective Disorders_, 140(3), 205–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.12.036
- Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation. _Psychological Review_, 98(2), 224–253. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224
- Murphy, K. (2021). You’re Not Listening. Celadon Books.
- Murray, H.A. (1938). Explorations in Personality. Oxford Univ. Press.
