---
title: 'Mental Illness as a Byproduct of Western Modernization'
date: '2022-12-20'
description: 'Has depression increased as a result of modernization? What about modernization in America specifically, and why does Japan have a low rate of depression despite having many similarities to the US?'
---

In primary care physician, Dr. Brandon Hidaka’s research paper, “Depression as a Disease of Modernity: Explanations for Increasing Prevalence”, Hidaka (2012) directly addresses two fundamental questions:

1. Have depression rates increased as a result of modernization?
2. If so, what are the exact reasons?

Firstly, what exactly is modernity? As defined by Hidaka (2012), it is a continuous concept that begins with agriculture, followed by industrialization, urbanization, and ever-accelerating changes in technology and social structure. For the context of Hidaka’s paper, “Modernization” is loosely defined as the conglomeration of a society’s urbanization, industrialization, technological advancement, secularization, consumerism, and westernization. And for clarification, “Depression” refers to the symptoms that define major depressive disorder (MDD).

Hidaka begins by introducing known “diseases of modernity.” These include atherosclerosis, hormone-related and gastrointestinal cancers, osteoporosis, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. As the leading cause of morbidity and mortality, diseases of modernity are the greatest threat to public health in the developed world (Yach et al., 2006, as cited in Hidaka, 2012). The purpose of Hidaka’s paper is that we want to know if depression should also be considered a “disease of modernity.”

A difficulty in this study is that it’s hard to examine depression rates many years ago. Despite it being studied in the 20th century, the data is not accurate, as classification of depression in the past is different from today’s definitions. Hidaka does, however, confirm a recent rising prevalence of depression in America, and it has continued to this day:
The prevalence of MDD is extraordinarily high and growing over time; between 2005 and 2018, the number of adults in the USA diagnosed with MDD increased from 13.7 million to 17.5 million, with the prevalence rate rising from 6.8 to 7.1% (Greenberg et al., 2015; Greenberg et al., 2021, as cited in Proudman et.al, 2021)

As evidence for the hypothesis of depression as a byproduct of modernization, Hidaka compares Lifetime Risk of Mood Disorder vs GDP. And yes, it does seem odd to use GDP as there are other factors e.g. health and inequality (we will cover this later), but the point is to have GDP represent modernization, while rather crudely. By comparing countries on various GDP per capita, it is evident that lifetime risk of mood disorder and GDP per capita trends towards statistical significance (IMF, 2010; Kessler et al., 2007; as cited in Hidaka 2012). The United States, for example, has the highest GDP per capita at $45k and the highest lifetime risk of mood disorder at 32%. In contrast, Mexico and Lebanon both have around $14k GDP per capita but a lifetime risk of mood disorder at 20%. This trend of modernization resulting in depression is also observed in American immigrants, and in new cohorts:

> Adoption of the American lifestyle appears to explain higher rates of depression in Mexican Americans born in the U.S. compared to Mexican immigrants (Vega et al., 2004, as cited in Hidaka, 2012). As metropolitan China has undergone rapid cultural transformation over recent decades, the risk of suffering from depression appears to have risen dramatically: in a retrospective study, Chinese born after 1966 were calculated to be 22.4 times more likely to suffer from a depressive episode during their lifetime compared to those born earlier than 1937 (Lee et al., 2007, as cited in Hidaka, 2012)

Since modernization correlates with an increased risk of depression, we wonder what are the specific components of modern, Western culture that contribute to this phenomenon. A decline in physical well-being is a prime suspect. Let’s revisit the diseases of modernity:

### Obesity

A systematic review of prospective studies found a reciprocal cause-and-effect relationship between obesity/overweight and depression: i.e. obese individuals had a 55% increased risk of developing depression compared to those of normal weight at follow-up, and depressed individuals were 58% more likely to become obese than those not depressed (Luppino et al., 2010, as cited in Hidaka 2012).

### Diet

The composition of the typical Western diet has been implicated as directly contributing to the incidence of obesity and chronic diseases via its alteration of metabolic and endocrine function (Cordain et al., 2005; Eaton et al., 2010; Pollan, 2008; as cited in Hidaka 2012).

### Physical Activity

While it is not to say it is a cure for depression, exercise appears to reduce depressive symptoms (Dunn and Dishman, 1991, as cited in Hidaka 2012).

### Light and Sleep

Decreased exposure to bright light and circadian dysregulation are the proximate cause of seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Proper endocrine function and increased dopamine and serotonin release are the presumed mechanisms by which light therapy alleviates SAD and MDD (Golden et al., 2005; Lambert et al., 2002; Tuunainen et al., 2004; as cited in Hidaka 2012).

### Social Environment

Accumulating evidence indicates that the social environment in modern-industrialized countries, especially in the United States, has become increasingly competitive, threatening, and socially isolating. Furthermore, there is a trend of higher lifetime risk of a mood disorder and a country’s Gini coefficient (a measure of income inequality ranging from 0–1, 1 being the most unequal) when using data from all countries in the World Mental Health survey initiative (p=0.09) (Davies et al., 2008; Kessler et al., 2007; as cited in Hidaka 2012). Inequality has risen in modernized countries, and unequal societies tend to have lower overall health and higher levels of social distrust, competition, and status anxiety (Wilkinson et al., 2009; Wilkinson and Pickett, 2006; as cited in Hidaka 2012).

People are also becoming lonelier. In 1985, the General Social Survey found that the mean and mode for number of confidants, people with whom one can comfortably discuss important issues, were both 3 and 3. In 2004, a repeat of the survey revealed that the mean and mode had respectively dropped to 2 and 0 (McPherson et al., 2006, as cited in Hidaka 2012). Lastly, a rise in psychopathology among young adults has been attributed to a shifting cultural emphasis away from intrinsic goals, e.g. social relationships, community, and competence, to extrinsic goals, like money, status, and appearance (Twenge et al., 2010, as cited in Hidaka 2012).

Hidaka’s work evaluates the evidence for rising rates of depression and offers various areas a modern society could work on. In fact, shortly after this paper was published, Hidaka’s professor invented a method designed to counter many of the negative, physical side effects of modernization, called Therapeutic Lifestyle Change (TLC). Disclaimer: this is not to say TLC is a cure for depression, as there’s also a large mental component to depression. What we can take away from Hidaka’s work is awareness of some of the modern struggles we face today as a result of our environment, such as loneliness, competition, and individualism. From there, we can take further steps to address these problems if any affect us.

## Western and Non-Western Modernization

Throughout Hidaka’s analysis of various countries and their lifetime risk of mood disorder, there is an interesting outlier: Japan–as it is a country with a high GDP but a low risk of mood disorder. There are many factors that likely contribute to this–one is that the Japanese exhibit a relatively low degree of inequality for a highly modern, capitalistic society (capitalism generally leads to higher inequality as shown by the Gini coefficient). Another possible explanation is that Japan has an extremely low prevalence of obesity in addition to a high-consumption of seafood products (omega-3). But perhaps the most interesting factor is how cultural emphasis on collectivism, as opposed to individualism (Kitayama et al., 1997; Oyserman et al., 2002; as cited in Hidaka, 2012), may also add to a social environment protective against the development of depression.

To get more background on the impacts of collectivism vs individualism, I read Professors Hazel Markus and Shinobu Kitayama’s paper, “Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation.” First, the authors define a problem in psychology in that most of what psychologists know about human nature is based on one particular view–the so-called Western view of the individual as an independent, self-contained, autonomous entity who (a) comprises a unique configuration of internal attributes (e.g. traits, abilities, motives, and values) and (b) behaves primarily as a consequence of these internal attributes (Geertz, 1975; Sampson, 1988,1989; Shweder & LeVine, 1984; as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991).

## Two Construals of the Self: Independent and Interdependent

Markus and Kitayama compare the western, _independent_ view of the self with a newly defined one, the _interdependent_ view. The _interdependent_ view of the self is exemplified in Japanese, Asian, African, Latin-American, and many southern European cultures.

The universal aspect of the self is that humans are able to recognize that they are distinct from others. Markus & Kitayama (1991) also state that each person probably also has some awareness of internal activity e.g. dreams, the continuous flow of thoughts and feelings, which are private to the extent that they cannot be directly known by others. Essentially, it is basic self-awareness that is the undisputed sense of self everyone attains.

Where the notion of the self diverges, however, is the extent that the individual is the primary unit of consciousness: “Instead, the sense of belongingness to a social relation may become so strong that it makes better sense to think of the relationship as the functional unit of conscious reflection” (Markus & Kitayama 1991). This is where the two construals of the self come in.

In Western culture, it is the dream to become self-sustaining, to discover and express your unique talents, and to chase your dreams and inner voice (Johnson, 1985; Marsella et al., 1985; J. G. Miller, 1988; Shweder & Bourne, 1984; as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991). Achieving this goal requires constructing oneself as an individual whose behavior is organized and made meaningful primarily by reference to one’s own internal repertoire of thoughts, feelings, and action, rather than by reference to the thoughts, feelings, and actions of others (Markus & Kitayama 1991). This view of the self derives from a belief in the wholeness and uniqueness of each person’s configuration of internal attributes (Johnson, 1985; Sampson, 1985, 1988, 1989; Waterman, 1981; as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991). It gives rise to processes like "self-actualization," "realizing oneself," "expressing one's unique configuration of needs, rights, and capacities," or "developing one's distinct potential." Some synonyms for this independent view of the self include _individualist_, _egocentric_, _separate_, _autonomous_, _idiocentric_, and _self-contained_ (Markus & Kitayama 1991).

In contrast, many non-Western cultures insist, in Kondo's (1982) terms, on the fundamental connectedness of human beings to each other (Markus & Kitayama 1991). Experiencing interdependence entails seeing oneself as part of an encompassing social relationship and recognizing that one's behavior is determined, contingent on, and, to a large extent organized by what the actor perceives to be the thoughts, feelings, and actions of others in the relationship (Markus & Kitayama 1991). This view of the self and the relationship between the self and others features the person not as separate from the social context but as more connected and less differentiated from others (Markus & Kitayama 1991). People are motivated to find a way to fit in with relevant others, to fulfill and create obligation, and in general to become part of various interpersonal relationships (Markus & Kitayama 1991). Some synonyms for this interdependent view of the self include _sociocentric_, _holistic_, _collective_, _allocentric_, _ensembled_, _constitutive_, _contextualist_, _connected_, and _relational_ (Markus & Kitayama 1991).

To help compare the two construals of the self, Markus & Kitayama provide figures to illustrate the similarities and differences. The independent self entails viewing your thoughts, emotions, and other internals completely belonging to yourself, where the same applies to others. The internals are represented by X’s, and the selves are circles containing many X’s. In the independent view of the self, yourself, your mother, father, friend etc. all have selves separated from each other. In contrast, in the interdependent view of the self, the circles representing our self are overlapped by others in our lives. Here are some
cultural examples to aid in comparing the two views of the self.

> The traditional Japanese mother carries the child on her back for a large part of the first 2 years. Lebra (1976) claimed that Japanese mothers teach their children to fear the pain of loneliness, whereas Westerners teach children how to be alone (Markus & Kitayama 1991)

> American parents who are trying to induce their children to eat their suppers are fond of saying ‘think of the starving kids in Ethiopia, and appreciate how lucky you are to be different from them.’ Japanese parents are likely to say ‘Think about the farmer who worked so hard to produce this rice for you; if you don't eat it, he will feel bad, for his efforts will have been in vain’(Markus & Kitayama 1991)

There are various consequences for these two views of the self (Markus & Kitayama also cover the difference in cognition, but it is not the most pertinent to the topic at hand).

## Consequences for Emotion

In previous psychological works, it was argued that while most emotions are viewed as universally experienced “natural” human phenomena, emotions are anything but natural (Lutz 1988 as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991). Rosaldo (1984) contended "feelings are not substances to be discovered in our blood but social practices organized by stories that we both enact and tell. They are structured by our forms of understanding" (p. 143), and we would add, specifically, by one's construal of the self (Markus & Kitayama 1991). Beyond the basic emotions like the fear invoked from a bright light or the pleasure from something sweet, emotions are a product of social life.

In the same way the two selves were defined, emotions can be placed into two categories: _ego-focused_ and _other-focused_. Some examples of _ego-focused_ emotions include anger, frustration, and pride–the key distinction is that these have the individual internal attributes (needs, goals, desires, abilities) as the primary referent. On the other hand, _other-focused_ emotions like sympathy, feelings of interpersonal communion, and shame have _another_ person as the primary referent.

To illustrate how emotions are not universal, Markus & Kitayama (1991) cite an example of how the _ego-focused_ emotion of anger is practically nonexistent in some cultures. This is the case in Tahiti, where anger is highly feared. But it is not that people have learned to suppress their “real” anger, but rather that, “they have learned the importance of attending to others, considering others, and being gentle in all situations, and as a consequence, very little anger is elicited” (Markus & Kitayama 1991). The same is exhibited in Eskimo cultures, where they do not feel, express, and do not talk about anger. In fact, Eskimos label angry behavior as “childish” when it is observed in foreigners.

Meanwhile, in America, some argue that expressing anger is necessary to blow off steam; others argue for the importance of controlling one’s anger. However, these are under the assumption that anger is a normally experienced emotion. The same differences can be held for the emotions of pride and guilt. Stipek et al. (1989) found that the Chinese were decidedly less likely to claim their own successful efforts as a source of pride than were Americans (Markus & Kitayama 1991). And those with independent selves felt guilt when violating, “a law or a moral principle”, while among Chinese, “the most commonly reported source of guilt was ‘hurting others psychologically’”(Markus & Kitayama 1991).

As anger is practically nonexistent in some cultures, the same notion of culture-specific emotions applies to the West. Markus & Kitayama (1991) document many _other-focused_ emotions, namely emotions indigenous to the Japanese. One such example is the feeling of _Amae_: “defined as the sense of, or the accompanying hope for, being lovingly cared for and involves depending on and presuming another’s indulgence…When a person experiences _amae_, she or he "feels the freedom to do whatever he or she wills" while being accepted and cared for by others with few strings attached. Some say _amae_ is a type of complete acceptance, a phenomenal replication of the ideal mother-infant bond (L. T. Doi, 1973)”(Markus & Kitayama 1991). _Amae_ is classified as an ambivalent, other-focused emotion.

Another indigenous and other-focused emotion is _Fureai_, or a feeling of connection with someone. There are also Japanese ego-focused emotions, like _Yuetukan_, or the feeling of superiority. Markus & Kitayama (1991) detail several additional other-focused Japanese indigenous emotions, demonstrating the variety of emotions that can arise when another person is the primary referent. Typically, and in the past, emotions can be categorized under a two-dimensional system: activation and pleasantness. However, Markus & Kitayama discover that this system is not sufficient when considering different cultures, so a third dimension of, “the extent to which the person is engaged in or disengaged from an interpersonal relationship” is added.

## Consequences for Motivation

For motivation in the West, it usually involves some type of internal, individually rooted need or motive–the motive to enhance one’s self-esteem, the motive to achieve, the motive to affiliate, the motive to avoid cognitive conflict, or the motive to self-actualize (Markus & Kitayama 1991). Quite expectedly, terms related to motivation for those with interdependent selves stress the other.

Murray (1938) assembled what he believed to be a comprehensive list of human motivations (see also Hilgard, 1953, 1987, as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991). These human motivations apply for both construals of the self:

- _Deference_: the need to admire and willingly follow a superior, to serve gladly
- _Similance_: the need to imitate or emulate others, to agree and believe
- _Affiliation_: the need to form friendships and associations
- _Nurturance_: the need to nourish, aid, or protect another
- _Succorance_: the need to seek aid, projection, or sympathy and to be dependent avoidance of blame, the need to avoid blame, ostracism, or punishment by inhibiting unconventional impulses and to be well behaved and obey the law
- _Abasement_: the need to comply and accept punishment or self-deprecation

In an interdependent culture, most of these motives are experienced as positive and desirable. However, in an independent culture, the motivations of _similance_ and _succorance_ are viewed as negative since they defy the strong, cultural need for independence–thus giving rise to _abasement_.

This relates back to the common American motive of breaking away, pushing ahead, and gaining control over surroundings. Feeling good about oneself typically requires fulfilling being unique, expressing one’s inner attributes, and asserting oneself. Although not uncontested, a reasonable empirical generalization from the research on self-related motives is that Westerners, particularly those with high self-esteem, try to enhance themselves whenever possible, and this tendency results in a pervasive self-serving bias (Markus & Kitayama 1991). Most Americans develop this self-favorability bias, even just at 4 years old:

> 0% of Americans believe they are above average in leadership skills, and “with respect to the ‘ability to get along with others,’ 0% thought they were below average, 60% thought they were in the top 10%, and 25% thought they were in the top 1% (Myers 1987 as cited in Markus & Kitayama 1991)

In contrast, self-enhancement and self-promotion are viewed quite negatively in Japanese culture. To test this, in a developmental study by Yoshida, Kojo, and Kaku (1982, Study 1, as cited by Markus & Kitayama 1991) gathered ratings on a dimension of personality (is he a good person?) and a dimension of ability (is he good at \_\_?) on a peer who commented on their superb athletic performance in a modest or self-promoting way.

Expectedly, the personality of the modest person was perceived much more favorably than the self-promoting one. However what was interesting was the rating of competency (ability). The self-enhancing one was viewed as more competent than the modest one by 2nd graders, but 5th graders viewed the modest one as more competent.

These findings indicate that as children are socialized in an interdependent cultural context, they begin to appreciate the cultural value of self-restraint and, furthermore, to believe in a positive association between self-restraint and other favorable attributes of the person not only in the social, emotional domains but also in the domains of ability and competence (Markus & Kitayama 1991)

## Meanings in the Context of Depression

Obviously, being easily angered and exhibiting it often is detrimental as it burdens others and decreases everyone's happiness, among other things. In an independent society, we may emphasize the importance of ego-centric emotions as a whole too heavily, thus inhibiting and diminishing our ability to understand and be receptive to other-focused emotions. In addition to losing out on feelings like sympathy, we would lose our ability to tend to others and really figure out what others feel. In short, we become more robotic. While other factors like the rise of internet usage and competition contribute to it, a very independent view of the self may contribute to a decline in _truly_ listening: a trend that has been noted by Kate Murphy in _You’re not Listening_. When others truly listen to us by providing descriptive and evaluative feedback while avoiding misunderstandings, we feel human. People are quick to reply to another person ranting or spilling out feelings with what Murphy calls the shift response. You have likely experienced this before, when someone completely missed the point of what you were talking about. It was a complete clash of brain wavelengths, and you got left feeling unsatisfied and unheard.

As noted by Markus & Kitayama, the desire to set ourselves apart and promote or enhance ourselves whenever possible can result in a self-favorability bias. As shown above, we are most likely (hilariously) wrong about rating our skills with respect to the average, despite our favorability for ourselves. Consequently, especially for those with high self-esteem, the incessant need to self-promote can result in a pervasive self-serving bias. Those with a self-serving bias are stuck in a cycle of self-enhancement, reject the validity of negative feedback, and take more credit than what’s due when receiving positive feedback.

The self-serving bias hinders one in the area of processing identity conflicts: one would likely never consider themselves as the problem and will engage in unconstructive thought patterns to protect self-esteem. For example, when receiving a bad grade on a test, one might blame the teacher instead of their own studying methodology. Or if one gets rejected by a love interest, one might give up on love completely to avoid putting their self-esteem at risk. Both of these hinder one from improving themselves and their relationships when given valuable feedback. And speaking of self-esteem, throughout “Culture and the self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation”, Markus & Kitayama (1991) note that self-esteem may be unique to Western cultures as self-enhancement is rare in other cultures. This is exactly the case in Japanese culture, where introspection is the cultural norm, replacing the time when Americans would excessively celebrate and promote themselves.

Finally, there is the detrimental act of comparison. In the independent self, we feel the need to set ourselves apart, chase the most prestigious achievements, and promote ourselves whenever possible. Instead of viewing others as equals and relationships as part of us, everyone is fighting to enhance the self–which is only enhanced with the increase of competition that has been occurring over the past few decades (Wilkinson et al., 2009; Wilkinson and Pickett, 2006; as cited in Hidaka 2012). Instead of looking outwards with compassion, we may fall into the trap of comparison. For the self, this can lead to feelings of inferiority, which spawn problems like narcissism and inferiority-superiority complexes. For others, particularly those with independent selves, they will feel at risk and will be manipulated into defending their self-esteem.

> Comparison is the thief of joy (Theodore Roosevelt)

While there are many aspects of a modern, capitalist society that cannot be immediately changed, there are aspects of the interdependent view of the self that we can adopt to improve our lives and relationships. The first is to simply increase the value of our relationships in our lives. With the independent view of self-enhancement and not seeing others as part of our construal of ourselves, you may overlook the importance of relationships as they won't allow us to “break free” or “set ourselves apart”. We will then neglect relationships in favor of self-enhancement; however, this lonely path increases unhappiness and dissatisfaction. After all, there's a reason why the interdependent construal exists in so many cultures. In addition, by adopting some of the interdependent views of the self, we may discover and be more attuned to other-focused emotions and motivations. This will not only lead us to become a more considerate and sympathetic person, but will also widen our world view on what we _really_ want in life. Finally, we gain awareness of how we may not be considering the dimension of interdependence in emotions, motivations, in psychology and in the world around us.

There are various traps and negative thinking patterns that arise from the self-serving and self-favorability biases, and the need to be independent. There are also many physical and mental lifestyle changes that come from the modern world—and our human bodies are not equipped to handle it. Hopefully this study provides greater understanding of the modern world, and an awareness of possible reasons why mental illness is increasing.

## References

- Hidaka B. H. (2012). Depression as a Disease of Modernity: Explanations for Increasing Prevalence. _Journal of Affective Disorders_, 140(3), 205–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.12.036
- Proudman, D., Greenberg, P., & Nellesen, D. (2021). The Growing Burden of Major Depressive Disorders (MDD): Implications for Researchers and Policy Makers. _PharmacoEconomics_, 39(6), 619–625. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40273-021-01040-7
- Twenge, J. M., Gentile, B., DeWall, C. N., Ma, D., Lacefield, K., & Schurtz, D. R. (2010). Birth cohort increases in psychopathology among young Americans, 1938-2007: A cross-temporal meta-analysis of the MMPI. _Clinical Psychology Review_, 30(2), 145–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2009.10.005
- Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation. _Psychological Review_, 98(2), 224–253. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224
- Murray, H.A. (1938). Explorations in Personality. Oxford Univ. Press.
- Murphy, K. (2021). You’re Not Listening. Celadon Books.
