---
title: 'The Landscape of the Human Mind'
date: '2022-10-30'
description: "You've probably heard about the subconscious and the conscious, but do you understand how they interact? And what about the voluble inner voice, as dubbed by Kate Murphy?"
---

The most brutal semester of my life was the fall of 2020 when I was consumed by the most challenging course in my major. I loved watching cooking videos in my free time, so nothing was happening besides school and food. When reflecting on how that semester felt, the best way to describe it was that it was one long marathon—the days all merged into one.

I felt reborn going into winter break. Overwhelming clarity and feelings of being refreshed hit like waves as I left campus and got on the airplane for home. But what was I to do without worrying about school or cooking? Lucky for me, my subconscious made plans. Having spent a whole semester practically giving me no time to sit down and be with my thoughts, I had neglected my subconscious so severely that it was gasping for air. In particular, it was dying to tell me that I was not fulfilled and was losing touch with my former hobbies.

While my subconscious thoughts briefly surfaced in the form of the occasional shower thought, I still had given no time to the inner voice. Why was this important? For one, the inner voice impacts how you view yourself and hear others. In _You're Not Listening_ by Kate Murphy, Murphy illustrates this by contrasting two voices:

> An inner voice that says, Are you sure you want to do that? Why don’t you put yourself in their shoes? And Yeah, that was hurtful, but maybe they didn’t intend to hurt you, is a very different voice from the one that says, They are all out to get me and I’m no good. The latter voice is the one that makes you react in ways that are not to your benefit (Murphy 2020, 131)

Internalizing the qualities of the second voice makes one more likely to become bitter and self-loathing, which is only reinforced when social interactions are perceived as worse than they actually are. The subconscious becomes intrusive and erratic, and the inner voice becomes irrational: resulting in a cloudy and unhappy mind. On the other hand, internalizing the qualities of the first voice makes you more understanding and empathetic. Most importantly, you will feel at peace.

When inner dialogue can take multiple sides to a conversation, problem-solving is easy. The solution usually already resides in you; you just have to develop it. Or it's just an irrational thought, or you're overthinking. I, myself, am a regular and organized journaler—just a glance at my Notes app will tell you how big of a role my inner voice plays in my decision-making and problem-solving. My journal categories are as follows: ‘Career,’ ‘Planning,’ ‘Processing,’ ‘Questions,’ ‘Self Help,’ ‘Struggles,’ ‘Workout,’ ‘Awakenings,’ ‘Decision Making,’ and ‘Brain Dump.’ Whenever I get a bothersome feeling from the subconscious, I try to develop it with the inner voice, resolve any problems, then categorize it. This technique, combined with a collaborative mindset, has led to a kinder inner voice and increased freedom from the mind, which I believe is the key to happiness.

How is the inner voice shaped? How can we improve it? First, let's define the inner voice. We know the inner voice has a main dialogue, but it can talk to itself from other perspectives:

> In his book _The Voices Within_, Fernyhough writes that many great philosophers and social theorists, including William James, Charles Sanders Peirce, and George Herbert Mead, believed the self generates conversations with itself by taking the perspective of another. An example is an athlete who might internalize the voice of a coach. Or you might have a back-and-forth with yourself that resembles exchanges you've had with your mother, boss, spouse, sibling, friend, or maybe a therapist (Murphy 2020, 129)

Therefore, the inner voice's tone and viewpoints are shaped by experiences with other people—including indirect interactions like watching TV personalities or reading a book. While your inner voice is not exactly your personality, the two are closely related and share similar qualities. Your inner voice has a personality that can generate conversations with itself, where each viewpoint can have a different character. Additionally, Murphy argues that the inner voice is perceived as louder, as proven by researchers from China and the United States. Hence, it dramatically impacts your reactions to various scenarios, which constitute your personality. The degree of impact depends per person since some rarely tap into their inner dialogue.

The critical difference between your personality and inner voice is the layer of translation between them and the noise that affects each of them. We can start to think of the landscape of the human mind by dividing it into layers. The first layer is the subconscious, the source of emotions and thoughts—these can be constructive or irrational, uplifting or defeating, enlightening or mundane, happy or depressing. The inner voice then collects and filters some of these subconscious entities, generating coherent ideas, beliefs, and a sense of self. Finally, everything pools into what is your personality, molded by experiences old and new. There is a loss in translation at each layer, and the inner voice is not the sole contributor to personality. Dr. Kanojia, psychiatrist and co-founder of the mental health coaching company Healthy Gamer, argued that the eastern perspective best describes personality. To understand the inner voice, let's briefly cover what defines personality:

- Manas - Emotional / Judgmental / Reactive - e.g., you get asked, "how did you sleep last night?" You notice everyone in the group staring at you, grinning. So you react by being careful in your response.
- Ahamkara - Ego / Sense of Self - How you perceive yourself: I believe I am this. It can act to protect you from the Manas, similar to how inner dialogue can protect weed out ideas from the subconscious. However, it is paradoxical at times as you can adopt numbing strategies. An example is getting rejected by a love interest. An easy way to deal with this is believing I do not deserve love or am not ready.
- Samskara - Impression in the mind that we recall in a particular scenario/programming -
  e.g., my last partner cheated, so now I’m afraid of betrayal. The unhelpful mind impressions are formed by improper digestion or processing.

While you can't precisely seek positive experiences in the future nor remove past experiences (Samskara), you can [change how you react](https://youtu.be/t_NRIVq2vzM). By focusing on your default response, problems become apparent, and you become self-aware. Remember the unhelpful voice from the first quote, They are all out to get me, and I’m no good? On paper, it is easy to evaluate this reaction and recognize that it is irrational and defeating: people rarely have harmful intentions. However, focusing on fixing the negatives is just one part of the puzzle; we still need to be able to develop good responses. Again, these are best formed by focusing on the default response. To an extent, your default responses are how others see your personality, so it is up to you to decide what changes to implement. Applying this technique can improve both personality and the inner voice.

Another way to shape the inner voice is by being an open and honest listener. The more people you listen to, "the more sides of the conversation the inner voice can take and the more solutions you can imagine" (Murphy 2020, 130). This isn't to say to listen to everyone; some people are not worth listening to. Instead, apply what Murphy coins as the support response, where you provide evaluative and descriptive feedback while avoiding misunderstandings and prejudice. I highly recommend Murphy's book if you are interested in the art of listening.

Unfortunately for some, their inner voice is overly critical. People take to great lengths to shut out their inner voice, probably because it nags them or brings up trauma. But the longer you neglect the subconscious and inner voice, the louder they become. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy is an excellent solution for this.

I would like to close with a final quote from Murphy, inviting the reader to consider their inner voice:

> Who does your inner voice remind you of? What does it tell you? Does your inner voice sound different in different situations? Is it friendly? Is it critical? These are all important things to ask yourself because your inner voice influences how you ponder things, interpret situations, make moral judgments, and solve problems. This, in turn, influences how you are in the world; whether you see the best or worst in people and whether you see the best or worst in yourself (Murphy 2020, 133)
