---
title: 'Philosophy on Happiness Pt.1: Awareness and Inner Peace'
date: '2022-11-12'
description: 'When we say we want to be sustainably happy, we mean that we want perpetual peace. This guide will cover a philosophy on peace and ways to attain it.'
---

Imagine a horizontal spectrum, rating people to their degree of indulgent behavior. On the far left side are the Buddhist monks, who live free of desires and pleasures of the world; they do not own any property, wear minimal clothing, are sexually abstinent, and consume just enough food not to die. On the far right side are hardcore drug addicts (likely unfortunate victims) living in oblivion. Now consider this: where on this spectrum are people the happiest?

But first, what is happiness? Many different terms describe feelings closely related to happiness, e.g., joy, pleasure, bliss, contentment, and well-being. Rather than get hung up on a formal definition, try to consolidate all of these terms and associated feelings into one: let’s assign it to pleasure. You usually feel pleasure at least once per day–maybe you had a great meal, played video games, or enjoyed dancing at a bar. You could say that you were happy because of something that happened today, but for the remainder of this text, let’s attribute the word ‘happiness’ to something else. Naval Ravikant, entrepreneur and philosopher, distinguishes happiness from what I just coined as 'pleasure' in a [podcast](https://nav.al/happiness):

> If you’ve ever gotten drunk or achieved an altered state of mind on psychedelic drugs or through meditation, breathing, or other hypnotic techniques, you have experienced brief moments of happiness beyond what you feel on a typical day. Of course, some of this is fake, pleasure-driven happiness. But there’s truth to it; otherwise, you wouldn’t desire that state. How do you nudge yourself in that direction on a perpetual basis, as opposed to visiting it by stunning your mind into submission and silence? (Ravikant)

Ravikant is referring to the state of peace: “When I say you want to be happy, what I’m actually saying is you want to find peace. We say peace of mind, but what we really want is peace from mind". The one similarity between the monk and the addict is that they spend their day trying to attain peace through meditation and oblivion, respectively. The difference, though, is that [meditation](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1261481222359801856) (and listening to the inner voice) clears the clutter—oblivion merely suppresses. Like cleaning, meditating is more challenging the more mess there is in your mind–do you think the addict will find meditating easy? To one who has never tried meditation or meditation-like activities, their subconscious likely has a long queue of emotions and thoughts needing processing. A key distinction to be made, as detailed in Ravikant's guide to meditation linked above, is that meditation is not to become a meditator but rather to provide fasting for your mind. As peace is the art of doing nothing, it is hard to pursue it. Nonetheless, it is all the more critical at a time when mental gluttony is widespread.

Unfortunately, meditation and listening to the inner voice will be challenging for many. Doing either will feel like crossing a highway where thoughts and emotions zoom too fast for us to grasp. And when we hold onto an idea, we spiral out of control. There are many reasons for this: one is that we listen less—as in _truly_ listening. People are so eager to interrupt each other; people like to classify and do not care to avoid misunderstanding; people often miss the point of why you tell them something, so you stop listening in return. As a result, it becomes hard to decipher the emotions and hidden meanings underlying our inner voice and thoughts from the subconscious, thus making mental clarity tougher to attain. However, the root cause of why it is hard to find peace is the rampant addiction to distraction caused by the internet and mobile devices:

> There was a time when, during idle or anxious moments, people reached for a cigarette. They lit up while fretting over a problem, drinking a cup of coffee, waiting on a friend, driving a car, mingling at a party, and unwinding after sex. Now, in those same situations, people just as reflexively reach for their phones. Like smokers nervously patting their pockets for cigarettes, people get jittery without their phones. Indeed, mental health experts say device dependency has many of the same behavioral, psychological, and neurobiological components as substance abuse. While our smartphones may not allow us to have a decent conversation, they seem to offer us just about everything else—social media, games, news, maps, recipes, videos, music, movies, podcasts, shopping, and pornography, if you're so inclined. In the end, none of it is as emotionally satisfying or essential to our well-being as connecting with a live human being. And yet, like any addict, we keep tapping, scrolling, and swiping as if pulling a lever on a slot machine, hoping to eventually hit the jackpot (Murphy 2020, 172)

Our compulsion to reach for our phones in these idle or anxious times—driven by fear of missing out—prevents sustained attention, thus making any task requiring thought cumbersome (Murphy 172-173). Being resistant to distraction is essential not only for listening to the inner voice and meditation, but also for daydreaming and fantasizing. Many of the most significant advances in science, arts, and letters have come from daydreaming: Albert Einstein, Alexander Graham Bell, Charles Darwin, Friedrich Nietzsche, T.S. Eliot, and Lewis Carroll all attributed their genius to long periods of interrupted musing (Murphy 173).

Research conducted by Microsoft found that since 2000, the average attention span has dropped from twelve to eight seconds. For context, a goldfish has an attention span of nine seconds, according to the report (Murphy 173). Companies are more aggressive than ever in grabbing our attention, knowing that the average attention span has decreased. Like it or not, we live in an age where attention is currency. Every video game, social media, and app is competing to hook you so they can make money through ads or can convince you to make in-app purchases. Sadly enough, “the quality of your attention doesn’t matter. Indeed, the more divided your attention, the more persuadable you are. The more likely you are to click _Buy Now._ Our human brains are not equipped to manage the onslaught” (Murphy 2020, 175). One thing to note is even when you're not directly using your phone, it is still detrimental to your attention by just being visibly present:

> A study by psychologists at the University of Essex found that the mere presence of a phone on the table–even if it’s silent–makes those sitting around the table feel more disconnected and disinclined to talk about anything important or meaningful, knowing if they do, they will probably be interrupted (Murphy 2020, 175)

And while you may say you can multitask, tune out, or power through the distractions, “research consistently shows that you cannot. The ability to multitask is a delusion. Each input degrades your attention"(Murphy 2020, 177). As exiting a train of thought to focus on a distraction is easier and more rewarding than keeping prolonged attention, we become addicted to distraction. The addiction to distraction hijacks our minds and hinders our ability to focus on other people–even if they’re right in front of us–consequently harming relationships. We also lose our ability to daydream, so we miss out on our potential to create something possibly revolutionary. Finally, we lose sight of the value of listening to others and the inner voice.

> Could you put your phone away for an hour? A half-hour? Five minutes?

Even after loosening the grip that distraction and device dependency have on you, you may still find meditation overwhelming. Journaling is a method to ease into clearing the mind. It is not a replacement for meditation; the two have different optimal use cases. While meditation is best for surrendering in the moment and letting thoughts pass through you, journaling is best for reviewing feelings and ideas. Using either for their inadvisable use case can result in rumination, which is okay, as it likely means something needs further attention. In the case of meditation, some thoughts may arise that are too complex to acknowledge and pass through it simply. Likewise, emotions may arise when tapping into the inner voice that will be too fleeting and complex to develop through journaling. For example, let’s say you got fired or got broken up with. You would likely feel inadequate or betrayed. The best way to deal with these emotions is through [processing](https://youtu.be/_tLxPkbXkEc), which is the art of responding to and resolving identity conflicts; it is a common mental health technique. Journaling is an excellent medium for processing as the issue is usually well-defined. Writing your feelings will make it easy to acknowledge them, thus accelerating you to find and resolve the identity conflict. Another excellent use case for journaling is decision-making. If it's tough to decide on something, like choosing what major to pursue or something simple like a purchase, you can list the pros and cons to aid in your decision-making. Processing and decision-making are just two methods that can help with mental clarity; you can adopt whatever strategies you like to deal with troublesome feelings.

One pitfall of journaling is that it's easy to overthink. Ideally, you should go into journaling with clearly defined topics, and then you should use the inner voice to sort out the issue. If the inner voice is not in charge, or it’s busy entertaining an unrelated subconscious thought, your journaling will be ineffective. Furthermore, many people’s inner voices are unhelpful–which is why Cognitive Behavioral Therapy exists. Nonetheless, a direct path to using your inner voice is preferred, as in plain old thinking; journaling is the backup plan.

Through meditation and working with the inner voice, the mind becomes quieter and more peaceful, which is what we wanted all along—peace is happiness. That is until more thoughts come up. Some days, it will feel like all your work has done nothing, and you are back at square one. The truth that peace is a lifelong process begs the question, is it possible to break free and reach a permanent state of peace? Although peace is far from algorithmic, we can say the state of being in peace is. Let's try applying the [halting
problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem) to answer if perpetual peace is attainable. Given someone's mind, can we determine if their peace will be interrupted? The only way to confirm this is if that person remained peaceful until they died. Even if someone did this, they likely would’ve had to throw everything away–like the Buddhist monks–in search of this eternal peace. Sure, peace sounds nice, but you lose the lows and highs by cutting out the risks in life. And life has too many ups and downs to dissuade us that perpetual peace is worth chasing, especially when breaking the cycle of reincarnation is not on the table. The harsh truth is that you will never be 100% satisfied, happy, or at peace. But you can get closer to those states by becoming more peaceful inside.

Suppose you agree that perpetual peace is something to accept as impossible. In that case, you must wonder if there's anything else to work towards besides listening to your inner voice and meditating. Ravikant argues that there is one thing you can work toward: “there’s an old Sikh saying, 'The name of God is truth.' When you understand certain things, and they become a part of you, you naturally become a more peaceful person” (Ravikant). We can consider truth as the pinnacle of learning; you want to keep challenging your viewpoints by listening to others to arrive at a refined sense of life and anything of it. Regardless, what even is _truth_, if [“I think, therefore I am”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cogito,_ergo_sum)? And what about love? Just food for thought.
