---
title:
  'The Price of Perpetual Distraction: Rediscovering Clarity in a Tech-Saturated
  World'
date: '2023-02-19'
description:
  "In today's digital age, technology and constant distraction can make it
  challenging to stay focused and clear-minded. We explore the implications of
  high technology usage, why clarity is essential, and provide practical tips
  for improving clarity. Learn how to cultivate greater clarity and regain
  control over your attention in a world filled with distractions."
---

In our highly modern, scientific society, it sometimes feels like the magic is
gone. We have more options than ever, yet we have never been lonelier. Mental
illness and suicide are on the rise. Feelings of meaninglessness are growing.

Technology usage is the main culprit. Instead of feeling down, we pick up our
phones and watch cat videos; instead of feeling stressed out by school, work, or
anything, we go on the internet. Such behavior is similar to gambling; in fact,
Internet Addiction (IA) and gambling are both impulse control disorders. As
summarized by Kate Murphy in _You’re Not Listening_, we keep tapping, scrolling,
and swiping as if pulling a lever on a slot machine, hoping to eventually hit
the jackpot (Murphy, 2020, p. 172).

Our attention spans have decreased, and we become numb to sensory overload. We
can observe these changes in the entertainment industry. For example, comedy
skits performed at Second City in Chicago have gone from fifteen to five minutes
(Murphy, 2020, p. 174). Directors have told Murphy they must make the action
more rapid and incorporate moving and flashing lighting. On TikTok, it’s
impossible to retain attention, so the norm is now two sources of entertainment
at once (think Subway Surfers or Minecraft parkour).

Indeed, mental health experts say device dependency has many of the same
behavioral, psychological, and neurobiological components as substance abuse
(Murphy, 2020, p. 172). Furthermore, it is a growing problem: in 2014, Cheng &
Li found that the global prevalence rate for IA was 6%, more than three times as
prevalent as pathological gambling. Among adolescents in China, Xin et al.
(2020) found that the prevalence of IA was 26.5%.

IA (and video game addiction) alter the brain in several ways. For example,
Cheng & Liu (2020) found that IA alters amygdala functional connectivity and
circuits between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex (PFC). The amygdala is
essential, as studies have shown it is necessary for processing emotions and
expressing interpersonal trust (Koscik & Tranel, 2011). In addition, the PFC is
responsible for attention, problem-solving, creativity, emotional regulation,
and awareness; it is critical to human functioning (Scott & Schoenberg, 2011).

In their 2020 study, Cheng & Liu confirmed that IA decreased the ability to
regulate and process emotions, which is crucial for psychological well-being,
resilience, and proper social interaction. Furthermore, IA makes one more
addiction-prone and decreases decision-making (Cheng & Liu, 2020). In a study
about Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD), Ko et al. (2015) found that IGD decreases
gray matter density and functional connectivity of the amygdala. High Gray
matter density is crucial as it has overlapping roles in cognitive function,
processing emotions, and strong memory. It also indicates mental development;
low gray matter density is associated with Alzheimer’s disease and other
dementias.

While you may not be affected by IA or IGD, they are highly prevalent today and
harm our psychological well-being and social skills. However, the most
significant change technology has caused is that we are externalizing our
attention, as coined by Dr. Alok Kanoija, co-founder of the mental health
coaching company Healthy Gamer. Dr. Kanoija provides an example of
“externalizing attention”:

> I wake up in the morning, and I turn on some kind of audiobook or podcast. And
> then I would be cooking and listening to something. Then I would walk to the
> train while listening to music. When I am on the train, I am reading my
> Kindle. When I am in class, I pay attention. My attention is externalized
> every moment of my day…the most frightening thing is going to the toilet
> without a phone (Kanoija, 2023a).

Optimizing your day to focus on studies is common, but constantly multitasking
and placing our remaining head space elsewhere is a recent development. Hundreds
of years ago, much of our day consisted of repetitive tasks, e.g., milking cows,
sewing something, or watering plants. During these repetitive tasks, our minds
wandered frequently. In contrast, today, the internet and video games provide
effortless and highly pleasurable distractions, so why would we do anything
else? Unfortunately, mental idle time is something we take for granted and do
not value enough in today’s society. Consider these questions:

> What is my purpose in life? Am I doing enough?

To form an answer, you need to be attuned to your internals–this is much easier
said than done, as many fear an overly negative inner voice. Spoiler, the only
way to reach your internals is through meditation, but doing it for the first
time will feel like being thrown into an ocean as a baby.

Firstly, we need clarity. What is clarity? Is it just “peace from mind,” as
coined by Naval Ravikant? Clarity is also a state of being as well as a
spectrum. Some clarity qualities include resilience to distraction, finding it
easy to acknowledge and let go of bothersome experiences, and being
collaborative with the inner voice. Clarity is not when you have solved a
problem; it is when you understand how to solve it. It is not magical or
perfect; 100% clarity is impossible. You cannot know the answer to everything
off the top of your head, but you can swiftly reach the answer with a clear
mind. Sometimes you can feel a lack of clarity: like an ominous fog.

Brain fog is an actual condition; however, it is hard to define because it is
undiagnosable–it is not a DSM or psychiatric illness (Kanoija, 2023b). Some
“brain fog” descriptions include slow thinking, difficulty focusing, confusion,
lack of concentration, forgetfulness, or haziness in thought processes (Ocon,
2013). While it is undiagnosable, some measurable factors can lead to “brain
fog,” such as POTS, alterations in cerebral blood flow regulation, cognitive
impairments, and even the perception of mental fatigue (Ocon, 2013).
Furthermore, Ocon (2013) focuses on “brain fog” in the context of Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome, which older people typically experience. Lastly, Kanoija
(2023b) states how the physiological factors of obesity, stress, diet,
dehydration, and insufficient sleep can cause “brain fog” and that Yoga and Tai
chi (namely postural changes) can help.

Nonetheless, “brain fog” is a purely subjective experience; we can think of a
lack of clarity as a low tier of “brain fog.” The main components of a lack of
clarity include an inability to focus, a vulnerability to distraction, and not
giving yourself enough time to think. Instead of being stressed, you distract
yourself from escaping the problem. As a result, your mind is an overflowing dam
filled with ideas–external worries, internal desires, or even incredible moments
of enlightenment. However, distraction is addictive and more accessible than
listening, thus clouding our minds.

Unfortunately, clarity is not easy either. But how do I know all of this? Is
this the pinnacle of clarity? As said by Mark Manson, author of _The Subtle Art_
_of Not Giving a F\*ck_:

> It sounds like an obvious cop-out, but seriously, why would anyone else have
> the answers to your life but you? You can take [self-help authors’]
> experiences and ideas into consideration, but ultimately it’s their
> application to your life that matters. None of this was supposed to be easy.
> Anyone who tells you otherwise is probably marketing something. (Manson, 2012)

What I know for sure is that a lack of clarity is a problem: many times, it
manifests in anxiety. The surefire way to tell if you have high clarity is by
seeing how far you make it when meditating–will it be possible to reach a state
where your thoughts slow down? Even better, can you reach the end of thought? To
meditate, I will prescribe the best description I have come across. It will be a
combination of Naval Ravikant’s processes for meditation and Dr. Kanoija’s
descriptions of what meditation will be like.

First, no fancy breathing techniques or a timer are needed. The time you take
can vary greatly, but Naval Ravikant advocates 60 minutes. Nonetheless, a timer
is unnecessary, as what matters is your progress. Instead, you can keep a
stopwatch running, which you should only check when you’re finished. Next, sit
straight, close your eyes, and let your thoughts pass through you. Then, what
will happen can be described in phases.

1. There will be many thoughts, like a highway where cars are thoughts. Many of
   them are external worries: I have to buy more shampoo. Did that coworker mean
   that? I am meditating. Resist the urge to wake up and reach for your phone.
   Do not get up to write down a thought; it will arise again if it is truly
   profound. Realize that thoughts are not something you should take ownership
   of, either.
2. After the initial high-frequency thoughts, things will slow down. It will
   slow down so much that you feel like you’re on a raft lost at sea. There is
   absolutely nothing–not a cloud in sight. You itch to open your eyes and reach
   for your phone, but you must keep going.
3. After staying in this state for a while, something magical happens, and a
   thought from your inner self arises. These internal thoughts and desires
   allow you to form answers to tough questions and know what you really want in
   life.

Meditation also has proven benefits for the brain. Remember the part about video
game addiction decreasing gray matter density, where increased gray matter
indicates high mental processing and cognitive functions? A 2011 study showed
that Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction, a therapeutic technique where an
instructor guides through meditation and yoga, has increased gray matter density
(Hölzel et al., 2011). Over an eight-week course with an average of 22.6 hours
engaged in formal homework exercises (average = 27 minutes a day), participants
had improved regulation of emotion and social cognition (Hölzel et al., 2011).

No journaling methods can achieve the same effect that meditation and
meditation-like techniques provide–these are the only ways to discover our
purposes and truly listen to our inner voice. However, clarity and meditation
are two different processes. While having clarity will make reaching the last
state of meditation more accessible, finding the answer to “what is my purpose
in life?” is something only you will know. You cannot experiment with what other
people find meaningful; there are no shortcuts to finding your internal desires.
Therefore, finding meaning is a purely individual experience. Clarity doesn’t
have to be.

For one, humans simply are not wired to be isolated creatures. From an
evolutionary psychology standpoint, exclusion meant death. In ancient tribes, if
your group shunned your behavior, you could not share food, water, or resources.
This is also why loneliness hurts so much.

You will understand how you feel and will see the next steps forward by having a
conversation with a friend where you can express your emotions and realities. In
addition, talking through emotional experiences with friends will strengthen
your relationships and lead you to embody new points of view, thus ensuring the
best possible resolution. Additionally, therapists exist to help with this sort
of problem. There is a reason why today, in our busy world, people do intensive
meditation or therapy sessions to achieve clarity quickly. Some even take
year-long vacations to faraway locations for clarity and to find purpose.

Journaling is a method that can increase clarity, but you have to be careful to
avoid ruminating. The goal of journaling is to be able to write a narrative
about some emotional experience–good or bad. Also, be aware of pronoun usage:
saying that others are the problem too often is narcissistic; saying that you
are the problem too often is depressing. Interchanging the “I”s and “They”s
while being understanding is vital to see different sides to a situation.
Through this technique, journaling can help weed out troublesome thoughts and
give clarity over significant experiences.

Since clarity is a state of being, it has to be a continual process. Whenever
you choose your phone instead of dealing with a stressful situation, you block
out your thoughts, letting them build up and eventually overwhelm you. One
method that I’ve found incredibly helpful to combat this is pacing. As described
above, we often reach for our phones in stressful moments, like when we
encounter a challenging problem during work or school. But when we put our phone
down and return to the problem, nothing has been done: our stress spikes, and we
lose progress. Instead of succumbing to distraction, the replacement is to pace,
which means just walking back and forth. You can even go to a different room if
you like. While you pace, your brain will start to relax and take a mental step
back, thus giving rise to creative ways to solve the problem and the next steps.
It’s a proper break that can destress you and take you out of fixating on one
detail in your selected approach.

Technology has several implications for our brains and our ability to think
clearly. The difference between humans now and a hundred years ago is that
distraction, in the form of the internet, video games, online shopping, and
fast, overstimulating entertainment, is so accessible and pleasurable that we
default to it, thus taking away our time to think. This is essential because the
most meaningful questions we face are only answered by listening to our inner
voice, accessed by meditating. However, meditating will be difficult for many
because of a lack of clarity. Clarity is a state of being and a spectrum.
Clarity consists of factors like resilience to distraction, a collaborative
inner voice, the ability to acknowledge and let go, and high cognition. Clarity
is a skill that can be improved by journaling or, even better, talking with
friends or a therapist. Finally, clarity is fundamental to focusing, finding
your purpose in life, and ultimately being the best you can be.

## References

Cheng, C., & Li, A. Y. (2014). Internet addiction prevalence and quality of
(real) life: a meta-analysis of 31 nations across seven world regions.
Cyberpsychology, behavior, and social networking, 17(12), 755–760.
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2014.0317

Cheng, H., & Liu, J. (2020). Alterations in Amygdala connectivity in Internet
Addiction Disorder. Scientific reports, 10(1), 2370.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-59195-w

Hölzel, B. K., Carmody, J., Vangel, M., Congleton, C., Yerramsetti, S. M., Gard,
T., & Lazar, S. W. (2011). Mindfulness practice leads to increases in regional
brain gray matter density. Psychiatry Research, 191(1), 36–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2010.08.006

Kanoija, A. (2023a, February 6). How To Find Purpose In Our Current World
[Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NuHEY7CjjTI

Kanoija, A. (2023b, January 4). Why Brain Fog Never Goes Away (and How To Get
Clarity) [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/qoR72-aM4mI

Ko, C. H., Hsieh, T. J., Wang, P. W., Lin, W. C., Yen, C. F., Chen, C. S., &
Yen, J. Y. (2015). Altered gray matter density and disrupted functional
connectivity of the amygdala in adults with Internet gaming disorder. Progress
in neuro-psychopharmacology & biological psychiatry, 57, 185–192.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2014.11.003

Koscik, T. R., & Tranel, D. (2011). The human amygdala is necessary for
developing and expressing normal interpersonal trust. Neuropsychologia, 49(4),
602–611. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.09.023

Manson, M. (2012, December 12). 5 Problems With the Self-Help Industry.
https://markmanson.net/self-help

Murphy, K. (2021). You’re Not Listening. Celadon Books.

Ocon A. J. (2013). Caught in the thickness of brain fog: exploring the cognitive
symptoms of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Frontiers in physiology, 4, 63.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2013.00063

Scott, J. G., & Schoenberg, M. R. (2011). Frontal lobe/executive functioning. In
M. R. Schoenberg & J. G. Scott (Eds.), The little black book of neuropsychology:
A syndrome-based approach (pp. 219–248). Springer Science + Business Media.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-76978-3_10
