---
title: 'The Struggles of Perfectionism and the Quest for Greatness'
date: '2023-11-11'
description: 'w'
---

I have a strange problem. I only settle for the best. Suboptimal is
unacceptable. This desire for perfection applies to my work ethic and bleeds
into how I treat my relationships. I have high expectations for my friends.

But I wasn’t having my expectations always met. This led to some
dissatisfaction. I learned that the only way to circumnavigate this was to lower
my expectations. But for relationships, that sucks! Relationships are such a key
and significant component of our lives, so having high expectations for your
friends is undeniably good. If you put in lots of effort and compassion into
your relationships, you better be reciprocated. The unfortunate and harsh
reality is that if your expectations of others are not met, you either:

1. Cut them off. Growing pains
2. Settle for “good,” not “great.”

So, really, this “struggle” of having high expectations for my friends was not a
struggle at all. But still, the general idea of only expecting the best raises
some questions.

- Am I really in the position of having high expectations? Or are these
  unrealistic? Do I have a
  [Bias blind spot](https://www.cmu.edu/news/stories/archives/2015/june/bias-blind-spot.html)?
- When, if at all, do you stop growing as a person? Do you take breaks from
  growth? Keep in mind how your reference points may shape your perception of
  how much growth you have. It relates to Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs and the
  part on self-actualization. But then, what’s the point of all this? How does
  this tie into happiness?

Let’s define the growth mindset. I initially had a misconception about it. A
growth mindset does not mean you are constantly finding and fixing holes or
finding areas to learn about/expand some expertise. A growth mindset does not
entail you seeking out problems. A growth mindset is an open way to tackle
problems or deal with the possibility of making a mistake.

While seeking out problems to fix can lead to tremendous growth, it takes an
absurd amount of energy. You need a lot of motivation, and you need a lot of
effort to execute and change yourself. This is probably a once-a-year thing. Or
it will come whenever you feel like you’re stagnating.

> But wouldn’t it be nice if you always were seeking out challenges?

Sure, it may lead to greater growth. But this is not a facet of life that leads
to greater happiness. Excessive growth may lead you to become estranged from
friends. It’s OK to share learnings and expect a lot from friends, but becoming
enveloped in growth and losing touch and human connection is not okay. The
“grind and retire early” folk are in a similar trap.

I also want to be extraordinary. But I only know what I don’t want to be. I
don’t want to stagnate. I don’t want to be closed-minded. I don’t want to be
obsessed with work. I don’t want to be unempathetic. I don’t want to be the
stereotypical engineer.

I also don’t think it’s fair to expect the best/give all the time. You can’t
give undivided attention 100% of the time. After all, studies show that giving
your partner 15hrs/week of undivided attention is good for maintaining a healthy
relationship. You can’t have every conversation follow your definition of
perfect. But what if it was possible? Why not chase it? It feels so shitty
giving up that dream of chasing excellence.

Maybe I’ve reached too far. Perhaps all this could be summed up into
“unrealistic expectations.” But again, everything online says that even
unrealistic expectations are good to have. They just don’t mention that perhaps
there’s a decision to make when you get disappointed. You cut out the bad.

Still, in terms of relationships, it is uncertain to decide when you need to cut
out the “good” for the “great.” Sometimes this decision is easy, maybe some
friends are detrimental to your health and genuinely bad influences. Sometimes
this is hard. You have to find the “great.”
