---
title: 'Philosophy on Happiness Pt.2: The Sunny Side'
date: '2022-11-21'
description: 'Life is full of ups and downs, and thinking about how tiny our existence is fills us with dread. What philosophies and mindsets should we adopt to live more positively?'
---

The point of Part 1 was to instill awareness by better defining the terms surrounding happiness. However, just settling for the harsh truth that we will never be 100% satisfied, happy, or at peace seems so dismal. And I don’t know about you, but I think a quest for philosophical truth doesn’t sound fun either (although it is important for developing our beliefs). Instead, I will prescribe the philosophy of Kurzgesagt, a German organization and animation and design studio with nearly 20 million subscribers on YouTube. It is called [optimistic nihilism](https://youtu.be/MBRqu0YOH14):

> You only get one shot at life, which is scary, but it also sets you free. If the universe ends in heat death, every humiliation you suffer in your life will be forgotten. Every mistake you made will not matter in the end. Every bad thing you did will be voided. If our life is all we get to experience, then it’s the only thing that matters. If the universe has no principles, the only principles relevant are the ones we decide on. If the universe has no purpose, then we get to dictate what its purpose is. Humans will most certainly cease to exist at some point, but before we do, we get to explore ourselves and the world around us. We get to experience feelings. We get to experience food, books, sunrises, and being with each other. The fact that we’re even able to think about these things is already kind of incredible. It’s easy to think of ourselves as separated from everything, but this is not true. We are as much the universe as a neutron star or a black hole or a nebula. Even better, actually, we are its thinking and feeling part: the centre organs of the universe. We are truly free in a universe-sized playground, so we might as well aim to be happy and to build some kind of utopia in the stars. It’s not as if we’ve found out everything there is to know. We don’t know why the rules of the universe are as they are, how life came into existence, what life is. We have no idea what consciousness is or if we are alone in the universe. But we can try to find some answers. There are billions of stars to visit, diseases to cure, people to help, happy feelings to be experienced, and video games to finish. There is so much to do. So, wrapping up, you’ve probably used up a good chunk of the time available to you. If this is our one shot at life, there is no reason not to have fun and live as happy as possible. Bonus points if you made the life of other people better. More bonus points if you help build a galactic human empire. Do the things that make you feel good. You get to decide whatever this means for you (Kurzgesagt 2016)

Simply put and above all, the mindset you should adopt is that you should do whatever makes you happy. If you advance technology or lengthen humanity’s survival, great, but you shouldn’t pursue doing this just because you feel obligated to. What’s so liberating about optimistic nihilism is the emphasis on how individual happiness is the sole priority. But I do want to highlight again the importance of Part 1, as happiness is a term that’s hard to define. Most of the time we use happy when we really mean pleasurable–these are things that are not guaranteed like parties, food, or a good conversation. What we really want is peace from mind, which can be achieved by working with the inner voice or by meditating. I encourage you to evaluate the climate of your mind: Are you afflicted by distraction? Is your brain speeding way too fast and/or on too many different tangents? Or, is your mind peaceful?

Another thing to consider about happiness is satisfaction. At the end of some days, you will feel like you aren’t doing enough. Maybe you finished your workday and felt like you wasted time and could’ve done much more. Maybe you wanted to talk to a friend and did, but it didn’t hit the spot like you were expecting. Maybe you just have a feeling that you’re underperforming and are missing out from a great legacy. Some of these feelings could be actionable, but most of the time it is plain dissatisfaction. Luckily, researchers have proven that gratitude can work to help with feelings of dissatisfaction. Kurzgesagt has a [video](https://youtu.be/WPPPFqsECz0) dedicated to this, and they have made a book to help ease into practicing gratitude–I am in the process of trying it.

What about the role of passions in happiness? These provide a sense of purpose as well as fulfillment. But you want to harness obsessions, not let them control you. What this means is that you should not be neglecting physical or mental health in preference of obsessing over a passion. And if you do not have a passion, get inspiration from others, or keep trying new things in search of one. Don’t let the past deter you from getting out of your comfort zone. This applies to everything in life, especially for anything involving risks. But the greater the risk, the greater the payoff. As said by Trevor Noah, comedian and host of The Daily Show, in “Born a Crime: Stories From a South African Childhood”:

> Remember the thing that caused the trauma, but don't hold on to the trauma. I never let the memory of something painful prevent me from trying something new. If you think too much about the ass-kicking your mom gave you, or the ass-kicking that life gave you, you'll stop pushing the boundaries and breaking the rules. It’s better to take it, spend some time crying, then wake up the next day and move on. You’ll have a few bruises and they’ll remind you of what happened and that’s okay. But after a while the bruises fade, and they fade for a reason–because now it’s time to get up to some shit again (Noah 2016, 90-91)

There's no point in ruminating over things in the past. If there was a problem, process it, accept it, and change yourself. You can keep the bruise as a reminder to not do something next time; don't be insensitive, don't fall for them if something doesn't feel right to you. However, ideally you want to be adaptive so that you don't need to rely on a massive list of do's and don'ts. This usually entails having self-awareness and being a good listener.

The final and most important piece I want to prescribe on the topic of happiness is a strong mindset in addition to prioritizing yourself. As said by [Anna Akana](https://youtu.be/sDVF040qBBo), actress and self-help YouTuber with nearly 3 million subscribers, “life is only ten percent what happens to us and ninety percent how we choose to react to it.” You want your mindset to be empowering and resilient, says Akana. This way, you can overcome setbacks with ease. You need to be so evaluative and so collaborative with your mind such that you’re able to realize your own shortcomings, situations where you aren’t feeling right, what relationships are worth advancing, and what elements of our lives are distractions. Another benefit of a strong mindset is that you could figure out, or could have known what to research, anything pertaining to the ideas and philosophies listed above—namely happiness. If you get an inkling that your subconscious is trying to tell you something, you should try to develop and identify the emotions by either meditating or listening to/working with the inner voice. From there, you can determine whether it is a valid concern, and if it is, you can research possible actions to take to resolve it. And it is not only problems you want to fix, but also how to thrive.
